# Day 29, 05.02.2026
Protocol writer: Louis

---
## __Introduction__
We started the day with the usual exercise discussion. Following that we went through a brief lecture on Data Ethics. For the final part we recapped our learnings of the 'Advanced Analytics' module.


## __Schedule__ 
|Time|Notes|

| 09:00 - 09:30 | Discussing Protocol <br>
| 09:40 - 10:00 | Exercise discussion <br>
| 10:15 - 10:50 | The 5 concepts / Data Ethics <br>
| 10:50 - 11:10 | Recap <br>

---

## __Data Ethics__ 

### __5 Concepts of Data Ethics__

__Ethics__ <br>
Data ethics is the study of how to handle data responsibly and fairly and how it's mechanism can affect people and society. Special focus on protecting personal data and avoidance of harm.<br>

__Privilege__ <br>
Social privilege is an advantage that benefits individuals belonging to certain social groups (race, gender, class, sexuality).

__Oppression__ <br>
A form of injustice which subordinates (a) social group(s). Maintained by mechanisms like laws, norms, stereotypes.

__Bias__ <br>
Unfair systematic error/prejudice on certain subjects or topics that wrongly influences process and outcome of an analysis or models and reflects inequalities and stereotypes.

__Intersectionality__ <br>
Framework for understanding how multiple social
identities intersect to shape unique experiences of
privilege and oppression. <br>
Emphasizes that systems of oppression do not
act independently - but interact to produce distinct, compounded forms of discrimination and
advantage.

### __GDPR__

Always make sure to follow the local laws and regulations of your data and the general working process with data. In Europe specifically the GDPR.

## __Module Recap__ 

Summary of what we learned during this module: <br>

- Analyzing data distribution and characteristics
- Confidence Intervals and choosing the right statistical test
- Hypothesis testing
- A/B testing
- Linear regression
- Clustering

---