# Day 15, 13.01.2026
Protocol writer: Nicole

---
## __Introduction__
As usual (except wednesdays) we worked on the protocol from the day before. At 9:30 o´clock Merna started a quick intro explaining how to filter big data with Pandas to explore, clean, and analyze the data efficiently. In groups we did the corresponding exercises before lunch break. After lunch, Merna explained the differences between methods, functions and attributes. We did than the exercises and discussed them. 


## __Schedule__ 
|Time|Notes|
|---|---|
| 09:00 - 09:30 | Daily protocol <br>
| 09:30 - 10:30 | Introduction into Pandas filtering <br>
| 10:30 - 11:30 | Pandas filtering exercise <br>
| 11:30 - 12:00 | Exercise discussion <br>
| 12:00 - 13:00 | Lunch break <br>
| 13:00 - 13:30 | Pandas methods functions attributes <br>
| 13:30 - 14:30 | Working on Exercises Pandas methods functions attributes <br>
| 14:30 - 15:00 | Exercise discussion <br>
| 15:00 - 15:30 | Feedback on lecture speed <br>

---

## __Points in the lesson__ 

### __Filtering__
Main ways to filter data in Pandas. Comparing operators of DataFrames to filter some set of a whole.

- **equality, single condition** 
One simple rule (e.g., weight > 4000g). Compares each value in list.
x == 10 
By filtering a single logical operator .
e.g.: df([df['column_name']>value]) --> The output is boolean (True/False)

- **greater than and less, Multiple conditions (element-wise)** 
Multiple logical operations. Combine rules with AND / OR logic. 
Combine rules for complex filtering by using * & (and), | (or), ~ (Not)
x > 
x <
x !=
**&** e.g.: df[(df['column1']>value1) & (df['column2']<value2)]
**|** e.g.: boolean_mask = (penguins['species'].isin(['chinstrap','gentoo']) | (penguins['body_mass(g)>4000'])))
**~** e.g.:boolean_mask =~penguins['species'].isin(['chinstrap','gentoo'])

**query Method** WE CAN USE ALSO FOR MULTIPLE CONDITIONS 
Remember that you have to write backtics (`) in the query method if the column title has a space in it.
e.g.: df.query('3.0 < ph < 3.5 and `residual sugar` < 2.9')

- **value conclusion**
To check if one value is in the list. Keep rows that match a list of values. Goes over each element. Keep rows where a value is in a list (e.g., only Chinstrap & Gentoo penguins).
x.isin ([])
e.g.: df[df['column_name'].isin([value1, value2, value3])]

- **String filtering, only strings**
Look at text patterns. Filtering using string access. Keep rows where text starts with / contains certain word. 
.str.name() --> This str accessor str means that you can now access any string methods (e.g. .lower(), .upper(), .startswith(), .endswith(), etc.) when filtering
e.g.: df[df['column_name'].str.startswith('species')]

- **value range, only numbers**
Keep values between two numbers. between() method includes the specific end values
You can overwrite the defaults, though:
How it works:
Default (inclusive='both'): left <= series <= right.
inclusive='neither': left < series < right (excludes both ends).
inclusive='left': left <= series < right (includes lower, excludes upper).
inclusive='right': left < series <= right (excludes lower, includes upper).
x.between(a,b)
e.g.: boolean_mask = penguins['body_mass(g)'.between(3500,4000)]
      penguins[boolean_mask]

- **missing value, Missing data check**
Find rows with empty cells.
x.isna()




### __Methods, Functions, Attributes__

-**Methods**, applying it, doing something to an object
Does something, attached to the object, the object does the action itself, always uses a dot .
df.groupby()
df.merge()
df.sort_values()
df.sum()
df.commit()
df.nunique()
df.('column').str.len('name')


-**Function**, it´s always applied to a package like Pandas (pd)
Outside, takes data, lives outside the object, you give data to it, it does not belong to the object. For the Python built-in functions (documentation: https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html), you do not need to specify a package:
pd.to_datetime()
pd.read_csv()
pd.unique(value)
pd.concat([df1, df2])
pd.DataFrame({a:[1,2,3],b:[4,5,6],c:[7,8]})

-**Attributes**, it´s not doing anything to an object, just information
Tells something, is just information, no action, NO parentheses ()
series.dtype 
DataFrame.shape - shows rows and columns. 
DataFrame.shape[0]  - for just showing rows ODER DataFrame.shape[1]  - for showing columns
df.size
df.columns

FOR MORE methods, functions, attributes: https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/frame.html

REMEMBER: 
- writing in the code e.g.: df. (writing the dot) will show as a dropdown-menu all the methods possible
- writing: pandas. show all of the funtions as a dropdown menu



---