# Day 10, 19.12.2025
Protocol writer: Daniel

---
## __Introduction__
We started the day with the protocol discussion. Afterwards Merna joined and we started the lecture on lists. We had a short break and started working on our exercises in groups of round 3. We continued the exercises until 12. After the lunchbreak, from 1PM we discussed the exercises in group. To finish the lecture day we organized the holidays to come and how we'd meet up after a break. Recap is recommended before we dive back in beginning of 2026.


## __Schedule__ 
|Time|Notes|

|09:00 - 09:30|Protocol discussion|
|09:30 - 11:00|Lists lecture with Merna|
|11:00 - 12:00|List exercises| 
|12:00 - 13:00|Break|
|13:00 - 14:00|Discussing the exercises in group| 


---

## __Points in the lesson__ 

### __lists__
* A list is one variable able to hold many data points
* lists are included in square brackets [items of the list]
    * create list like: list 
* lists are ordered, mutable, iterable (Items inside are iterable), can have duplicates and hold mixed and same type of variable (eg. str, int etc. and also other lists called "nested lists").
* particularly useful for iterating data
* list items can be indexed 
   * first is 0 as always with Python
   * another two brackets to index nested lists
* lists can be concatenated using plus sign "+" (requires same data type)
* another way to create a list is the list function
    * list("Hello") --> list = ["H", "e", "l", "l", "o"]


### __list methods__
* need brackets at the end
* .append()
    * adds another element to <ins>the end</ins> of the list
    * can store elements other than list (vs concatenation)
    * adds just one element (vs extend can add more)
* .pop()
    * removes a specific item from list
    * indexing via brackets
* .remove()
    * remove items from lists
    * identification by defining the variable rather than indexing
* .extend()
    * adds items to lists - each element of another iterable individually
    * passes <ins>iterable input only</ins> (vs .append -> passes any variable)
    * indexes before adding to list (64 -> [6,4] or in letters hello -> ['h','e','l','l','o'])
* .clear()
    * clears all items of the list 
* .count()
    * counts how many times an element appears in a list
* .sort()
    * sorts the list
    * and we can describe the way to sort it (descending/ascending)
* .reverse()
    * reverses the list
* .insert()
    * adds items at specific index
* .index()
    * returns the index of an item
* .copy()
    + returns a copy of the list


### __indexing__
* we can index positive and negative
    * positive chooses element from left to right
    * negative indexing chooses element from the end of the list

### __functions in list__
* we can use list functions like sum, min, max
* can only be used if elements are iterable

### __in operator for lists__
* in operator can be used to check if elements are inside lists
* also "not in" is possible


### __ if statement in lists
* if statements check whether elements are inside of lists and the block can add/remove or apply similar actions 
    
### __len Function__

* len()
    * returns the number of elements
    * can be used on any iterable object
---

## __Tweaks__
* list function can be applied to only one iterable item
* [::3] iterating list by measure given in third position (int)
    * try indexing <ins>NOT</ins> from the first index [0] if iteration calls for it [2:5:2] -> starting at index 2 stopping before index 5 and selecting every 2nd item
    * format like: my_list[start:stop:step]




---

## __Discussion Questions__

Q1. 
Q2. 

---