# Day 24, 30.01.2026  
Protocol writer: Marzie

---

## __Introduction__  
Today’s session focused on hypothesis testing

---

## __Schedule__
| Time | Notes |
|---|---|
| 09:30 - 11:00 | introduction to new subject|
| 11:00 - 11:30 | short self study |
| 11:30 - 12:00 | assessing answers and further explanations |
| 12:00 - 13:00 | Lunch break|
| 13:00 - 15:00 | doing exercises individually |
| 15:00 - EOD | Group work on exercises |

---
## __Hypothesis testing__
**New packets and built_in functions to import:** 
`scipy` and `statsmodels`


## 1. Normality Assessment
Before performing parametric tests (Z/T-tests), verify if the data is normally distributed.

**A. Shapiro-Wilk Test**
* **Null Hypothesis (*H_0*):** Data is normal.
* **Alternative Hypothesis (*H_1*):** Data is not normal.
* **Alpha ($\alpha$):** 0.05
```
_, p_value_shapiro = stats.shapiro(df_checkout['CheckoutTime'])
print(f"Shapiro-Wilk p-value: {p_value_shapiro:.3f}")
```

**B. QQ Plot**
Points should align with the 45-degree line. Significant deviations at the ends indicate heavy tails or skewness.
```
stats.probplot(df_checkout['CheckoutTime'], dist="norm", plot=plt)

```


## 2. Defining Sideness (Tail Type)
The "sideness" is determined by your research question ($H_1$).

__Type__    || __Question__	| | __Python alternative__ || __Visual__
- Two-Sided	|| Is there any difference?	|| 'two-sided'	|| Both tails
- One-Sided	|| Is A greater than B?	|| 'greater'  || Right tail
- One-Sided	|| Is A less than B?	|| 'smaller'	|| Left tail

## 3. Selecting the Test

Based on *data type*, *distribution* of the data, sample *size* and available information on populations's *standard deviation* there are common tests including: **t_test** and **z-test**.

The Z-test is ideal when you know the population's standard deviation and have large sample sizes (n≥30). But since the std of the population is rarely know, z_test is not used often. For example: 
```
z_stat, p_value = ztest(df_bulbs["lifespan"], value=1000, alternative="two-sided")
```
T-tests is a go-to tool when the population standard deviation is unknown and with smaller sample sizes. For example:
```
t_stat, p_value_two = stats.ttest_1samp(df_bulbs['lifespan'], popmean=1000, alternative='two-sided')
```

***Important***
These tests are only suitable when the data is normal distributed.

## 4. Decision Rule (The P-Value)
The *p*-value is the probability that your results occurred by pure chance.

- *p* =< 0.05*: Statistically Significant. Reject the Null Hypothesis (*H_0*). There is strong evidence for the effect.

- *p* > 0.05*: Not Significant. 
Fail to reject the Null Hypothesis (*H_0*). The results are likely due to chance.



