# Day 23, 27.01.2026
Protocol writer: Daniel

---
## __Introduction__
We started the day with the presentation of our project work. Afterwards we began the lecture of the new module "Advanced Data Analytics". From there we headed into the lunch break and afterwards continued our lecture until 2PM. Afterwards we cloned the new repo to local and got our environments ready. When the local repos where finished we started working through the notebooks of the first module "distribution". To close the day we headed into group work on exercises.


## __Schedule__ 
|Time|Notes|
|---|---|
|09:00 - 11.30|Project Presentation|
|11.30 - 12:00|Starting new module "Advanced Data Analytics"|
|12:00 - 13:00|Break| 
|13:00 - 14:00|Continuing lecture on "Advanced Data Analytics"|
|14:00 - 14.30|Cloning module repo / installed scipy
|14:30 - 15.00|Jupyter Notebooks on Distribution for discrete and continuous variables 
|15:00 - EOD| Exercises in groups


## __Points in the lesson__ 

### ___Distribution___
* Describes how values are spread out
* how often values occur in data

### ___Data Types Recap___
* <ins>Categeorical</ins>
    * nominal: no natural order
    * ordinal: ordered relationship between categories
* <ins>Numeric Data</ins>
    * continuous: infinite number of possible values
    * Discrete: countable quantities

### ___Random Variable___
* variable that can take on multiple values each with associated probability
* written in upper case letter "X" (vs  x)

### ___probability distribution___
* describing how probabilities are distributed over values of random variable

### ___probability functions___
* math. function describing likelihood of outcomes
* allow us to plot hypothetical distribution
* three main types
    * <ins>Probability Mass Function (PMF)</ins>
        * For discrete random Variable
        * for example probability of "4" on a die roll
    * <ins>Probability Density Function (PDF)</ins>
        * density of the probability 
        * for continuous Variables
        * Area under curve = probability of 1
    * <ins> Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF)</ins>
        * cumulative probability that random variable <= certain value
        * discrete and continuous
        * Example: Probability to roll a die <=4
  * Choice depends on data type:
       * Discrete data → PMF
       * Continuous data → PDF
       * Both → CDF (to answer "≤ x" questions)

### ___Types of Distributions___
* Parameters define the shape and behavior of a distribution
* Examples:
    * Normal distribution → mean (μ) and standard deviation (σ)
    * Binomial distribution → number of trials (n) and probability of success (p)
    * Poisson distribution → average rate (λ)
### ___Binomial Distribution___
* Counting successes for fixed number of trials
* Example: Coin toss x10 --> how many times heads up?
* very good for scenarios with binary outcomes
### ___Normal Distribution___
* bell shaped curve with most data points clustering around mean and few further away
* Example: Height, IQ Scores
### ___Poisson Distribution___
* number of events occuring within fixed interval of time or space, given that events happen independently and constantly
* mean = variance
### ___Exponential Distribution___
* time between events occuring at constant rate
* mean = standard deviation
* waiting time between events 
    * vs poisson -> nr of events per time unit
    * example: timeframes between bus stops
### ___Uniform Distribution___
* describes a situation where all outcomes are equally likely within a range
    * for example rolling a fair die
### ___Log Normal Distribution___
* when logarithm of variable is normally distributed
    * for example: Income Distribution, stock prices

### ___Why Distribution matters?___
* Understand the behaviour of data
* identify outliers
* Enhance visualization
* help selecting fitting methods and models
* Limitations:
    * Not all data is normally distributed
    * Ignoring Skewness

---

## __Tweaks__
* Mean and variance being equal does not mean distributions are identical
* Some distributions look similar visually but behave very differently


---

## __Discussion Questions__

Q1. When to recognize if mean / Variance are still considered to be the same or different?
Q2. How do we decide which distribution fits our dataset best?

---
