# Day 9, 18.12.2025
Protocol writer: Gabriela

---
## __Introduction__

Class started with daily protocol of the day before. Class colaboreted to fullfill the daily protocol with insights and questions. Questions about daily protocol workflow in Github and local computer were answered. We had a class about conditions, afterwards we did exercises in groups. After lunch, we meet in main classrom to discuss the exercises and to discuss other gerneral and technical questions. 


Main topics of the day: conditions, if statement,indentation,  if statement chain(if, elif, else), flow chart, boolean Operators, in Operator, Nested If stament, State variables, comparison operators (==, >=, ...)

Next protocol writer for day : Daniel 

## __Schedule__ 
|Time|Notes|
|---|---|
|09:00 - 10:15|Daily Protocol, Questions about daily protocol workflow in Github and local computer|
|10:15 - 11:30|Conditions|
|11:30 - 12:00|Conditions Exercise| 
|12:00 - 13:00|Lunch break|   
|13:00 - 14:00|Discussion of Conditions exercises| 
|14:00 - 15:00|general and technical QAs| 

---

## __Conditions__


* any setence that yields True or False is a condition
* Important concepts: Logical test, Colon, Indentation(as entering Tab button - 4 spaces)
* If statments need an indentedent block(need an inner block, otherwise the code will show error - no valid code inside)
* to get back to the main code, it is necessary to write any code without indentation
* There is no connection between the inner side of an condition (if statement) and the outter side. The reason is the indentation
* After condition statement, it is important to write a colon ":" and to use indentation. 


---

## __The if Statement Chain (if, elif, else)__ 
* elif = "else if"
* elif gives more alternatives for the condition to be True
* When a condition is True(if or elif), it will no checkout the next conditions. Nevertheless, if it False, it will check out conditions until one is True
* else condition is the last step in the if Statement  and is optional 

## __Flow Chart__ 

* Shows the logical execution of conditions

## __Review of Boolean Operators__ 
* AND, OR, NOT
* If you want to check several conditions at once, use round brackets/parenthesis between them

## __In Operator__ 
* It Is called membership operator
* yields True or False
* not in Operator (negation of in operator)

## __Nested If Statement__
* For one condition, you can check out more than once
* Two indentations are necessary 


## __State Variables__

* assign a variable to True or False(Boolean variable)
* Real life Example: Check out if data is cleaned or not.
* don't need an operator, they are sufficient on themselves as if statement

logged_in = True
if logged_in:
    print("You are logged in")



## __Exercise Insights__
* New String function:  .startswith(), .endswith()
* Cleaned strings using replace: .replace(old version, new version)
* Keep attention to variables inside and outside a condition

